Supertrait Auto-impl (#3851)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3851-supertrait-auto-impls.md

    fn stream(&self) -> impl Iterator<Item = i32> + Send;
    fn call(&self) -> u32;
}
```

### <a id="po-o"></a>Example: automatic supertrait implementation

A second prominent example is the `PartialOrd` and `Ord` traits.

```rust
trait PartialOrd<Rhs = Self> {
    fn partial_cmp(&self, other: &Rhs) -> Option<Ordering>;
    // ...
}
trait Ord<Rhs = Self>: PartialOrd<Rhs> {
    fn cmp(&self, other: &Rhs) -> Ordering;
    // ...
}
// This is one of the more probably implementation:
impl PartialOrd for X {
    fn partial_cmp(&self, other: &Self) -> Option<Ordering> {
        Some(self.cmp(other))
    }
}
impl Ord for X {
    fn cmp(&self, other: &Self) -> Ordering {
        // here it defines a total ordering
        ..
    }
}
```

The `PartialOrd` trait could be reworked in this proposal as follows.

```rust
trait PartialOrd<Rhs = Self> {
    fn partial_cmp(&self, other: &Rhs) -> Option<Ordering>;
}
trait Ord<Rhs = Self>: PartialOrd<Rhs> {
    fn cmp(&self, other: &Rhs) -> Ordering;
    auto impl PartialOrd<Rhs> {
        fn partial_cmp(&self, other: &Rhs) -> Option<Ordering> {
            Some(self.cmp(other))
        }
    }
}
```

> There are now two choices for type `X` in the downstream crate.

Reviewer: Is this a *forced* choice, meaning that `X` downstream is broken unless it chooses one of these (new) choices?

AFAICT this is a major breaking change for the stdlib, because `extern impl PartialOrd;` appears to be required to support separate `impl PartialOrd for X` and `impl Ord for X`. If that's the case, it might be good to mention that how this would be addressed will be explained later, ideally in a named section that can have its anchor linked here.

```rust
// Note that we do not out right require that the data can be taken and owned ...
pub enum Cow<'a, B: AsOwned + ?Sized> {
    Borrowed(&'a B),
    Owned(B::Owned),
}

impl<B: AsOwned + ?Sized> Deref for Cow<'_, B> {
    type Target = B;
    fn deref(&self) -> &Self::Target {
        match self {
            Self::Borrowed(v) => v,
            Self::Owned(v) => v.borrow(),
        }
    }
}

impl<B: ToOwned + ?Sized> Cow<'_, B> {
    // ... until the need arises here.
    pub fn into_owned(self) -> B::Owned {
        match self {
            Self::Borrowed(v) => v.to_owned(),
            Self::Owned(v) => v,
        }
    }
}
```

## Helpers for implementing traits

This is not the main motivation for this RFC, but it is a secondary additional feature that this RFC enables.

For some traits, it's difficult to implement the trait directly because the "raw" interface that the trait exposes is complex. If the trait is unsafe, this may be even worse as the end-user may not wish to write any unsafe code. This feature makes it easy to provide utilities for more easily implementing the trait.

### Example: Serde

> The serde traits are notoriously difficult to implement directly. It's almost always done by macro. Imagine if you could write this:

Reviewer: I had to look up the `serde::Serialize` trait to make sense I understood this example correctly:
```
pub trait Serialize {
    fn serialize<S>(&self, serializer: S) -> Result<S::Ok, S::Error>
       where S: Serializer;
}
```

It might be useful to mention it here and save the reader the lookup.

```rs
pub trait Receiver {
    type Target: ?Sized;
}

pub trait Deref: Receiver {
    type Target: ?Sized;
    fn deref(&self) -> &Self::Target;
}

impl<T: Deref> Receiver for T {
    type Target = <T as Deref>::Target;
}
```

The problem is that crates need to be able to write this code:

```rs
struct SmartPtr(*mut T);

impl<T> Receiver for SmartPtr<T> {
    type Target = T;
}

impl<T: SafeToDeref> Deref for SmartPtr<T> {
    fn deref(&self) -> &T {
        unsafe { &*self.0 }
    }
}
```

This kind of code where `SmartPtr` *sometimes* implements `Deref` but *always* implements `Receiver` is not possible with a blanket implementation. The feature proposed by this RFC would make the above construction a possibility.
</details>

## Tenets

- Backward-compatibility
  - We need to maintain that all the current `impl` blocks to compile, specifically the `impl Deref` litmus test mentioned in the [deref-receiver] motivating example.
  - This demand also extends to other possible library traits that may see relocation of items into a future supertrait, while ensuring that the existing `impl` blocks continue to compile.
- Intuitional readability and clear syntatical signal

>   - We strive for a syntax that is intuitional and easily connected to the existing constructs.

Reviewer: typo, I believe:
```suggestion
- Intuitive readability and clear syntatical signal
  - We strive for a syntax that is intuitive and easily connected to the existing constructs.
```

# Guide-level explanation

This section gives an overview of the `auto impl` feature and some example use-cases.

## Overview

It is possible to declare that implementations of a sub-trait should automatically implement a given supertrait.

```rs
trait MyTrait {
    fn my_func(&self);
}

trait MySubTrait: MyTrait {
    auto impl MyTrait;
    
    fn my_second_func(&self);
}
```

Given the above traits, when you implement `MySubTrait`, you must also specify items from `MyTrait`.

```rs
impl MySubTrait for String {
    fn my_func(&self) {
        println!("my_func on String");
    }
    
    fn my_second_func(&self) {
        println!("my_second_func on String");
    }
}
```

In the above case, it is an error to not specify all items from `MyTrait`. However, it is possible to opt-out of implementing `MyTrait` in the `impl MySubTrait` block:

```rs
impl MyTrait for String {
    fn my_func(&self) {
        println!("my_func on String");
    }
}
impl MySubTrait for String {
    extern impl MyTrait;
    fn my_second_func(&self) {
        println!("my_second_func on String");
    }
}

> ```

Author: Yes, it is breaking change. In fact, I see merits in the sense that `extern impl Supertrait` would now be required in `impl Subtrait for S {}` block, as confirmation that
- the criterion to implement `Supertrait` is met, which is very important if `Supertrait` is a marker trait;
- the choice between `auto impl` in `trait Supertrait` or `extern impl` while keeping the existing `impl Supertrait` is explicit.

For this reason, I think it is desirable and I do not quite agree with it being footgun-y.

}
```

In this case, an impl block for `MySubTrait` will still automatically implement `MyTrait`, but you are not required to provide an implementation of `my_func` since a default implementation exists.

### Example: Helpers for implementing a trait

With default auto implementations, it becomes possible to provide a sub-trait whose purpose is to help you implement the super trait in a specific way.

For example, given this super trait:

```rs
trait EventHandler {
    type Event;
    fn handle_event(&mut self, event: Self::Event);
}
```

Then you might have a helper for implementing `EventHandler` for a specific event type:

```rs
enum MouseEvent {
    ClickEvent(ClickEvent),
    MoveEvent(MoveEvent),
}

trait MouseEventHandler: EventHandler {
    auto impl EventHandler {
        type Event = MouseEvent;
        fn handle_event(&mut self, event: MouseEvent) {
            use MouseEvent::*;
            match event {
                ClickEvent(evt) => self.click_event(evt),
                MoveEvent(evt) => self.move_event(evt),
            }
        }
    }
    
    fn click_event(&mut self, event: ClickEvent);
    fn move_event(&mut self, event: MoveEvent);
}

> ```

Author: Thank you for your comments! Let me open my comment with response to this concern.

>I think this is a fairly serious flaw for a feature that aims to _improve_ the overall situation of what’s possible in semver-comparible API changes.

So I do not believe that improving the semver-compatibility is a goal of this proposal and I do not try to sell this proposal as a general solution to the problem.

One of the motivations of the proposal is to provide a more user friendly and flexible alternative to blanket implementations involving supertraits without the problems coming from them such as potential overlapping implementations and inability to override those blanket implementations. As illustration, let us use the `EventHandler` and see what `auto impl` offers and _does not offer._

Without `auto impl`, the way to supply default implementation is to introduce a blanket implementation.

```rust
// CRATE A
trait MouseEventHandler: EventHandler {
    fn click_event(&mut self, event: ClickEvent);
    fn move_event(&mut self, event: MoveEvent);
}

impl<T: MouseEventHandler> EventHandler for T { // (*)
	type Event = MouseEvent;
	fn handle_event(&mut self, event: MouseEvent) {
		use MouseEvent::*;
		match event {
			ClickEvent(evt) => self.click_event(evt),
			MoveEvent(evt) => self.move_event(evt),
		}
	}
}

// CRATE B
trait NicerMouseEventHandler: MouseEventHandler { .. }

impl<T: MouseEventHandler> NicerMouseEventHandler for T { .. }
```

Now with `auto impl` as described in the RFC, for each `impl MouseEventHandler for MyType` for some `MyType` there will be an `impl EventHandler for MyType` that is templated after the `auto impl` block. The blanket implementation, as we know that comes with quite some drawbacks, is not necessary.

What I advocate strongly is that `auto impl` should still be treated conceptually as a blanket implementation with some modification. To think about it, we should ask ourselves, when the blanket implementation `(*)` in Crate `A` changes, by means of changes to the associated type **or changes to implementation details of `handle_event` even**, do we introduce SemVer breaking change? Please correct me if I am wrong, I think _it is definitely a SemVer breaking change hazard._ It could be overarching to say that any implementations with generics, blanket implementations included, will induce SemVer hazards when they are changed even in implementation details, but it rule sounds reasonable to me. cc @obi1kenobi

And I don't think this view should be altered when `auto impl` is morally a blanket implementation, so questions about SemVer hazards should be resolved by treating them as blanket implementations and answered in that domain.

> If you imagine such implementations helpers may even come from a different crate than EventHandler itself, and yet-another crate ultimately uses it downstream for defining PrintHandler, then any change switching out the convenience/helper used to power the EventHandler impl would in and my itself also be a breaking change.

So, yes, following this train of thought these are all breaking changes.

> In my opinion, ideally, it should somehow be made possible to implement something _like_ a trait, but that isn’t necessarily an _actual_ trait itself, but merely functions like a template for implementing one (or several) other traits more conveniently.

> It’s unfortunate that this seems unnecessary for the _primary_ motivating use-case of updating true hierarchies where all traits involved and all methods _are_ supposed to be public and stably available anyway, not mere implementation details of a kind of trait-to-trait adapter; but I’m 100% certain that a supertrait auto-impl like this one _will_ be used for that kind of thing, no matter what, so a more complete solution design seems somewhat necessary IMHO.

I still do not quite get what you are getting to and I am curious about your ideas. Would you mind elaborating? A few sketches will help.

> ```

Reviewer: > So I do not believe that improving the semver-compatibility is a goal of this proposal and I do not try to sell this proposal as a general solution to the problem.

This raises the obvious question: should it be a goal?

I believe we should explore what it would take to get to "yes".

Blanket impls are full of surprising SemVer hazards today. This proposal in its current state would make things even more challenging. It would be the wrong tradeoff, in my opinion, to address one problem by introducing a harder one.

> ```

Author: Replying to @steffahn ...

#### On `template trait`

I like the `template trait` idea honestly. I have one question. In the `BorrowOrdHash` we have apparently the item `borrow` syntatically associated to it. `BorrowOrdHash` is not a trait, so `borrow` is an inherent method to the `Self` type? What is the implication to the method resolution?

On the overall topic, I wonder this can be solved by existing unstable features like rust-lang/rust#41517.

It is also a matter of perspective. To me `trait` is a contract and a set of invariants. Following this strict interpretation, which I recommend every user to follow, no two traits are SemVer compatible as soon as there is a mismatch in the crate identity or version, no matter how void the trait content would be. Moving from `EqOrdByKey + HashByKey` to  `BorrowOrdHash` is a breaking change and I will not have a second thought when I bump my crate version.

However, this is a common pattern in ecosystem to have a bag of trait bounds and give it a name. What they want is have a way to write a trait bound succinctly instead of writing 42 trait bounds connect with `+` in their `where` clauses everywhere. For that we already have answer, which is trait alias. If one really wants a bag of traits, we should make it work.

On that note, `template trait` can fill a gap between trait alias + bag of impls and `auto impl`, on the point of introducing SemVer hazard. I would say SemVer hazard is not necessarily a bad thing, it is _good_ by a lot. It is rather a bad idea that any type that implements this bag of traits `Eq`/`Ord`/... could be used to call my API. That would mean that I loose my control over what types are safe to use for my library, because the user could call my library without generating the right impls through (proc-)macros or writing the right impls because they never read trait documentation.

So in my opinion when a trait is really so void of trait characteristics and regresses to just a bag of trait impls without strings attached, I would recommend to make trait alias work, which I am interested in also because of its important niche, and let our users use it. To throw right tools at the problem basically.

---

#### On orphan rules

`auto impl` should not allow any changes to trait solving or trait selection at this point, this is agreed upon. On the point of orphan rules, `auto impl` does not intend to make `impl<T> Foo<MyStruct, T> for String {}` compile-what a blanket implementation cannot do, should `auto impl` will not enable either. If we really need to be careful, I think this is about good diagnostic to explain why orphan rule is violated at which `impl`.

```rs
/// Implementers must ensure that even() returns an
/// even number.
unsafe trait Even {
    /// Guaranteed to return an even number.
    fn even(&self) -> usize;
}

trait Double: Even {
    // SAFETY: 2*x is always even
    unsafe auto impl Even {
        fn even(&self) -> usize {
            2 * self.value_to_double()
        }
    }
    fn value_to_double(&self) -> usize;
}

// provides an impl for Even safely
impl Double for String {
    fn value_to_double(&self) -> usize {
        self.len()
    }
}
```

---

# Reference-level explanation

In a trait declaration, you may declare one or more `auto impl` items with a block that provides implementations for one or more items from the super trait.

```rs
trait SubTrait: SuperTrait {
    auto impl SuperTrait {
        const MY_CONST: u32 = 10;
        type MyType = String;
        fn my_func(&self) -> u32 {
            42
        }
    }
}
```

All items inside the `auto impl` block must match an item from the super trait of the same name and signature. When the block is empty, it is legal to use a semicolon instead. That is, these are equivalent:

- `auto impl SuperTrait {}`

> - `auto impl SuperTrait;`

Reviewer: I assume this means that if `SuperTrait` has no items, either of these forms counts as a complete implementation of `SuperTrait` as well when the subtrait that includes this `auto` block is implemented, correct?

    fn method(&self) -> impl Trait1;
}

trait Subtrait: Supertrait {
    auto impl Supertrait {
        fn method(&self) -> impl Trait1 = <Self as Subtrait>::method;
    }

    fn method(&self) -> impl Trait1 + Send
    where Self: 'static + Send;
}
```

### Extension: `auto impl` support for higher-kinded superbound

Today a higher-kinded superbound is allowed as a superbound as long as only lifetime parameters are
used.

```rust
trait Supertrait<'a> {}
trait Subtrait: for<'a> Supertrait<'a> {}
```

We propose to extend `auto impl` support to superbounds like this. In order to achieve this,
the `auto impl` item in traits and `impl` blocks are equipped with exclusively lifetime generic
parameters.

```rust
trait Supertrait<'a> {}
trait Subtrait: for<'a> Supertrait<'a> {
    auto impl<'a> Supertrait<'a>;
}
```

The usual no-shadowing rule applies when it comes to lifetime parameters.

```rust
trait Subtrait<'a>: for<'a> Supertrait<'a> {
    //         ~~ first declared here
    auto impl<'a> Supertrait<'a> {
        //~^ ERROR lifetime name `'a` shadows a lifetime name that is already in scope
        //~|  lifetime `'a` already in scope
    }
}
```

## Unsafe auto implementations

> The `auto impl` items can be marked `unsafe`, which declares that implementing the sub-trait without using the auto implementation is unsafe.

Reviewer: Does this need to be updated per the use-of-`unsafe` discussion above? This seems to introduce a safety obligation, but `unsafe auto impl` in comments above was described as discharging obligations, not introducing them.

### Removal of `auto impl` in sub-trait definition

This is a SemVer hazard and can constitute a major change. This requires the downstream implementors of the sub-trait to move the `auto impl` out of the `impl` block.

### Addition and removal of `unsafe` qualifier on the `auto impl` directives

This is a SemVer hazard and mandates a major change. The implementors should inspect their implementation against the trait safety specification and add or remove safety comments accordingly. It is possible that the semantics of the API would change as the safety obligation can propagate through the API across multiple crate boundaries.

### Switching between `extern impl Supertrait` and `auto impl Supertrait`

This is a SemVer hazard and mandates a minor change. Provided that both the sub-trait and the super-trait remains SemVer stable, this constitutes only a change in implementation detail.

### Change in the proper defintion of super- and sub-traits

This is a SemVer hazard and mandates a major change. The justification follows API change in trait irregardless of super- or sub-trait relationship. This scenario encompasses any changes in types, function signature, bounds, names.

> ---

Reviewer: One more example:

Adding defaulted items to a trait is usually non-breaking:
```rust
pub trait Super {
    // Adding this item is fine.
    fn example() -> i64 { 0 }
}
```

But say a subtrait contains two `auto impl` supertraits:
```rust
pub trait Subtrait {
    auto impl upstream::Super;
    auto impl other::Other;
}
```

What happens if `other::Other` already had an `example` function?

If I've understood the "Naming ambiguity" portion of the proposal correctly, this is now an ambiguity conflict:
> If the sub-trait definition contains two `auto impl` directives and a sub-trait implementation has an item with a name that can be resolved to an associated item in both of the `auto impl` supertraits, irrespective of the associated item kind, then it **must** also be rejected as ambiguity.

So now adding a trait item with a default is newly SemVer-major as a result of this feature, while previously it was totally safe! Oops!

Author: Maybe the wording is not perfect, so let me attach a worked example in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3851/commits/25597e7b584d355c4fb6fe170e26ee734e3d42ff.

So, if I run through the example, no matter how many items with default implementation (actually I think we should call them provided methods?) are added into `TraitA` or `TraitB`, they are not considered for name resolution- one just cannot provide another implementation in their own trait definition nowadays.

So the wording should have been, name ambiguity only arises when in `impl Subtrait` there is an item `foo` that matches a **required** item `trait TraitA` and another in `trait TraitB`, while in `trait Subtrait` definition `foo` is missing.

```rust
pub trait TraitA {
    fn foo();
}
pub trait TraitB {
    fn foo();
}
pub trait Subtrait: TraitA + TraitB {
    auto impl TraitA;
    auto impl TraitB;
}
impl Subtrait for MyType {
    fn foo() {} //~ ERROR This is true name ambiguity.
}
```

And under no circumstances `Subtrait::foo` can be resolved given the above example. I do not intend to make any `$name` in `Subtrait::$name` to be resolved to any item not truly belonging to `Subtrait`. This is one invariant I do not wish to break.

> ---

Reviewer: > > // in crate `upstream2`, which depends on `upstream1`
> 
> Also this will not compile. `Supertrait` has an item `Item` but your `auto impl Supertrait` block is empty.

Could you point me to where the RFC specified this requirement? I must have missed it.

This is why your help is key in figuring out the edge cases. This is a complex feature, and you understand it 10x better than anyone else.

> ---

Reviewer 2: > Just to clarify, do you mean "Adding an auto impl item to an existing trait is only a non-breaking change if the auto impl is for a trait within the same crate"? If so, that seems fine.

Basically, yes. In fact I was talking about something slightly more narrow than this: That adding a defaulted item to a new or existing auto impl, when the item being defaulted is defined in another crate, is a breaking change.

---

This is different from the case where you say "my existing item `foo()` now lives in this supertrait, your impls of my `foo()` now implement `Supertrait::foo()`". For that see my suggestion in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3851#discussion_r2933383431.

Thinking about the two combined, I think we would we end up with these implications:

1. Replacing an existing item with a reference to a supertrait item in another crate is fine if you explicitly name it from the subtrait (`use Supertrait::item;` or similar, as in the linked comment).
2. It is ok to default that item if it was already defaulted, _or_ at the same time as replacing it.
3. Once you release a version moving the item to the supertrait without defaulting, you lose the ability to add a default later.

edit: My line of reasoning is that following these implications offloads the problem of "which default is this item using" to the existing problem of "are you using this auto impl or not".

> 

Reviewer: I reject this line of argument in the strongest terms.

Quite honestly, I find your reply insulting. Especially so given the amount of time and energy I've already invested in both cargo-semver-checks and in this RFC.

I've demonstrated in other comments that this is absolutely not "as if" equivalent to blanket implementations. It is disingenuous to claim this is trivial to work out just by starting with the rules for blanket implementations.

Even if it were, I feel it is not acceptable for a proposer of a new language feature to demand someone else work out its edge cases.

> 

Author: It is unfortunate that our conversation arrived at this state. I would like to clarify that I do not intend to downplay the importance of `cargo-semver-checks` and I have greatly and respectfully reviewed your comments insofar. 

However, I have a hard time to understand exactly how `cargo-semver-checks` would consider, whether SemVer hazard would take place under which rules. I have attended to your talks and I remember that there have been many many rules built into this tool. I would like to seek your understanding that without a clear deduction formulation of SemVer hazards, language feature designers could find themselves paralysed and confused. Please understand that, given that we are at an early stage of exploration, I would prefer the RFC text to stay focused on the main language design. I am at the same time sympathetic towards the ecosystem tool designer and, therefore, I offered an option to simplify the the SemVer deduction by reducing it and modelling it after blanket implementation analogy. That is my suggestion and I am eager to hear if this model fails at any other edge cases.

For the time being, I am sad to say that I have not enough expertise to expand the SemVer hazard section to the extend that meets the rigor that `cargo-semver-checks` requires, not until I become the expert in the tool itself. Until then, I would still need your help and I have always appreciated it. 🙇

}
```
Then you might have a helper for implementing `EventHandler` for a specific event type:
```rs
enum MouseEvent {
    ClickEvent(ClickEvent),
    MoveEvent(MoveEvent),
}

trait MouseEventHandler: EventHandler {
    auto impl EventHandler {
        type Event = MouseEvent;
        fn handle_event(&mut self, event: MouseEvent) {
            use MouseEvent::*;
            match event {
                ClickEvent(evt) => self.click_event(evt),
                MoveEvent(evt) => self.move_event(evt),
            }
        }
    }
    
    fn click_event(&mut self, event: ClickEvent);
    fn move_event(&mut self, event: MoveEvent);
}
```
This allows crates to implement `EventHandler` by writing this code:
```rs
struct PrintHandler;

impl MouseEventHandler for PrintHandler {
    fn click_event(&mut self, event: ClickEvent) {
        println!("Click: {:?}", event);
    }
    fn move_event(&mut self, event: MoveEvent) {
        println!("Move: {:?}", event);
    }
}
```
The `MouseEventHandler` trait could even come from a different crate than `EventHandler`.

## Unsafe auto impl

It's possible to declare that an auto implementation is unsafe.
```rs
trait MySubTrait: MyTrait {

>     unsafe auto impl MyTrait;

Reviewer 3: so, does this create an `unsafe` requirement or discharge an existing `unsafe` requirement? you seem to have it do both which is generally not how Rust uses `unsafe` anymore, now that we have [`unsafe_op_in_unsafe_fn`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/edition-guide/rust-2024/unsafe-op-in-unsafe-fn.html) enabled by default

Author: I see that this can be confusing.

- Inside a `trait Subtrait: .. { .. }` block, `unsafe auto impl` creates an `unsafe` requirement.
- Inside a `impl Subtrait { .. }` block, `unsafe auto impl` discharges the corresponding `unsafe` requirement.

Should we adjust the "keyword" orders, so that the difference can be more obvious?

Reviewer 4: +1 to @programmerjake 's expectations-- I would've expected `unsafe auto impl` to discharge an unsafe requirement-- that is, guarante that the provided impl of the supertrait fulfills the requirements of the `unsafe trait SuperTrait`. This is the usual meaning of `unsafe impl` in Rust.

```rust
trait Supertrait {
    fn method(&self) -> impl Trait1;
}

trait Subtrait: Supertrait {
    auto impl Supertrait {
        fn method(&self) -> impl Trait1 = <Self as Subtrait>::method;
    }

    fn method(&self) -> impl Trait1 + Send
    where Self: 'static + Send;
}
```

## Unsafe auto implementations

The `auto impl` items can be marked `unsafe`, which declares that implementing the sub-trait without using the auto implementation is unsafe.

When an `auto impl` is declared unsafe, then:

* To opt-out, you must write `unsafe extern impl`.
* If any methods from the `unsafe auto impl` block are overridden, then the `impl` block must be `unsafe`.

If the super trait is `unsafe`, then the `auto impl` declaration must also be `unsafe`.

## Naming ambiguity

If the sub-trait defines an item of the same name as an item in the super-trait, then the `auto impl` block must provide a default implementation of the item from the super trait.

In this scenario, any item in an impl block of the sub-trait using the ambiguous name will always refer to the item from the sub-trait. This means that the only way to override the item from the super trait is to use `extern impl`.

> ## Mandatory `external impl` declaration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Mandatory `extern impl` declaration
```

|-|-|-|
| non-marker | Mandatory[<sup>a</sup>](#e-i-a) | Optional[<sup>b</sup>](#e-i-b) |
| marker | Mandatory[<sup>c</sup>](#e-i-c) | Mandatory[<sup>c</sup>](#e-i-c) |

### <a id="e-i-a"></a>Case a: `auto impl` block of a non-marker supertrait in sub-`trait` block
For illustration, here is an example.
```rust
trait Supertrait {
    type Item;
}
trait Subtrait: Supertrait {
    auto impl Supertrait {
        type Item = u32;
    }
}

impl Supertrait for MyStruct {
    type Item = u8;
}
impl Subtrait for MyStruct {
    // Without the following ...
    extern impl Supertrait;
    // ... the code will be rejected for overlapping `impl Supertrait`s
}
```
The reason for this is that given that `trait Subtrait` has already provided its implementation, an implementation of `Subtrait` must choose between the default implementation and a user-defined implementation. We prefer explicit confirmation through `extern impl` declaration from the implementor, rather than making the compiler to reason about whether `auto impl` should be backfilled for ease of language feature implementation.

#### Extension: Possible relaxation through an unsafe attribute and a future-compatibility lint

> For important ecosystem traits like `PartialOrd` and `Ord`, this rule is still unsatisfactory due to [the potential rewrites required](#po-o) on downstream crates, even though it could be as small as an additional `extern impl PartialOrd`. As an extension, the rule could be relaxed with an unsafe attribute `#[probe_extern_impl]` and apply further trait selection to decide whether the default implementation given by the `auto impl` block should be used.

Reviewer 3: and here

// why a trait like below is implemented on a type.
trait MarkerTrait {}

trait Supertrait: MarkerTrait {
    auto impl MarkerTrait;
}

impl Supertrait for MyType {
    // Here it is a good place to explain
    // why MyType: MarkerTrait
    auto impl MarkerTrait;
    // or otherwise `extern impl MarkerTrait;` is required
}
```

### What about checking whether another impl exists to decide automatic `impl`-filling?

We could potentially determine whether the opt-out is used based on whether an `impl` of the supertrait exists, but we prefer not to. We have existing mechanism to determine the specialisation and implementation overlaps. Whether a supertrait `impl` overlaps or not, is not the concern of this proposal.

If we would deduce whether an `auto impl` should be effected, there could present a hazard that silently changes the program behaviour.

```rs
trait MyTrait { default fn .. }

trait AutoMyTrait: MyTrait {
    auto impl MyTrait;
}

trait MyOtherTrait { .. }

struct Foo;

// Suppose we allow users to elide the `auto impl`/`extern impl` directive
// and we deduce based on some applicability criterion ...
impl AutoMyTrait for Foo {} // <-- generates MyTrait

> // Suppose this item is added at one point of time

Reviewer 5: This came out of a meeting with @joshtriplett and @tmandry. Implementing "do these impls overlap" via proper coherence checking is significantly harder than doing some self-type based fast reject.

Right now builtin auto-trait impls are disabled if there exists any impl with the outermost rigid constructor (e.g we disable all auto trait impls for `MyType<T>` if there's an impl for `MyType<i32>` cc https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/93367). Doing something similar here is kinda trivial from a type system pov

The more powerful "whether we emit an impl depends on whether coherence thinks impls overlap" is a lot harder as suddenly the while trait system needs to reason about "impls may or may not exist at this point". Supporting that requires a new `TypingMode` and refactorings to the way we iterate trait impls in the solver and so on. That has a significantly higher type system cost.

I personally would kinda prefer not doing proper trait solving:tm: to figure out whether to emit impls, but hmm. I guess I've become more open to make the type system harder more involved over time it's nice because the typing mode used to figure out whether to add these impls won't be soundness critical, so it's just annoying to impl

impl<T: MyOtherTrait> MyTrait for T { .. }

impl MyOtherTrait for Foo {}

// QUESTION: which `impl MyTrait for Foo` fulfills the bound `Foo: MyTrait`?
// Should it be the `auto impl MyTrait;` with default items?
// Should it be the `impl<T: MyOtherTrait> MyTrait for T` with `T := Foo`?
```

## Why is a hard error on ambiguity acceptable to us?

We hold the basic assumption that most associated items of a trait have sensible names. We would rather advise that one shall avoid name clashes and ambiguity through better, future-oriented trait designs.

In any case, `auto impl Trait { .. }` blocks still remains available for cases where ambiguity is unavoidable or favorable in niche scenario.

## Why this naming?

It is still up for discussion.

> ## Why use `unsafe` in this way

Reviewer 4: The RFC no longer uses `unsafe` in a surprising way, so I think this section can be dropped.

Reviewer 3: I think the RFC still uses `unsafe` in a surprising way: see [this thread](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3851#discussion_r2376681991)
